<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Environment Variables</h1>
</div>

---

# Environment variables hierarchy

*What are the different levels or scopes of environment variables?*

---

# Environment variables hierarchy answer

1. **OS Level** – System-wide environment variables set at the operating system level.  

2. **User Level** – Environment variables specific to a user session.  

3. **Shell Level** – Variables set within a shell session (e.g., in `.bashrc`, `.zshrc`).  

4. **Process Level** – Variables set for a specific process and its child processes.  

5. **Runtime Level** – Variables managed within a programming language runtime (e.g., `process.env` in Node.js, `os.environ` in Python etc.).

---

# Defining it locally 

Let's use dotenv in Python 

Dotenv exists across many languages. The standard is that the files are named `.env`.

---

# Python: Virtual environments

Mac users try to run `pip install python-dotenv` and see what happens.

Mac users can't run pip globally because of the way Python is installed which restricts `pip` to avoid breaking the system Python or Homebrew setup. 

While other OS users can run pip globally, it's not recommended. 

*Why shouldn't you install Python packages globally?*

<details> 
  <summary>Answer</summary>
   Because different projects depend on different version. You can't have two versions of the same package at the same time.
</details>


---

# Solution: Virtual environments

An isolated environment for Python projects.

Create it in the folder where Python projects are defined. 

You can **activate** it and then `pip` will only install in that environment.

You can **deactivate** it and then you are back to your normal shell environment.

The virtual environment is typically named `.venv`. 

You will know that you are in the virtual environment if you see (`.venv`) in the command-line prompt.

---

# Set up a virtual environment

Ensure that you use python version `3.x.x`. In the slides `python` is my alias for `python3`. If you do not have the alias set up then write out the command that you have.

## *nix users:

Create a virtual environment and activate it:

```bash
$ python -m venv .venv
$ source venv/bin/activate
```

## Windows users

Initialize the shell:

```powershell
$ python -m venv .venv
$ ./venv/Scripts/activate
```

---

# Install dotenv for Python

This is the package:

https://pypi.org/project/python-dotenv/

Note that the package to install is called `python-dotenv` but we import the library as `dotenv`. This is because of how modules work in Python. 


Once the virtual environment is activated install the package:

```bash
$ pip install python-dotenv
```


---

# Python: Two ways to use dotenv

```python
from dotenv import load_dotenv
import os

load_dotenv()
print(os.getenv("API_KEY"))

```

Or:

```python
from dotenv import dotenv_values

config = dotenv_values(".env")
print(config["API_KEY"])
```

---

# Create a template file!

Your `.env` should be added to .gitignore and never pushed. 

Create a copy of your `.env` file and remove the sensitive information but keep the keys and perhaps add example values. 

This file should be pushed. There is no single naming convention but usually they are called something similar to:

- `.env.example`
- `.env.sample`
- `.env.template`

*What is the purpose of doing this?*

---

# In GitHub Action - Manually

```yaml
name: Create .env file

on: [push]


jobs:
    build:
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    
        - name: Create .env file
          run: |
            echo "API_KEY=${{ secrets.ENV_API_KEY }}" >> .env
            echo "OTHER_SECRET=${{ secrets.ENV_OTHER_SECRET }}" >> .env
```

You don't *have* to prepend the secrets with `ENV_` but it's a nice way to show that they are different from other secrets and their purpose. 

---

# In GitHub Action - Marketplace extension


Using [SpicyPizza/create-envfile@v2.0](https://github.com/SpicyPizza/create-envfile) is a very popular way of doing it:

```yaml
name: Create .env file

on: [push]

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - name: Create .env file
        uses: SpicyPizza/create-envfile@v2.0
        with:
          envkey_API_KEY: ${{ secrets.ENV_API_KEY }}
          envkey_OTHER_SECRET: ${{ secrets.ENV_OTHER_SECRET }}
          file_name: .env
```

The manual way is significantly more difficult and preferable for security reasons.

---

# With docker-compose.yaml

**Example 1**: Defining environment variables:

```yaml
services:
  app:
    image: myapp:latest
    environment:
      - PUBLIC_KEY=publickey
      - NOT_SECRET=thisisnotsecret
```

**Example 2**: Defining secrets and reading them from `.env` files into the environment example:

```yaml
services:
  app:
    image: myapp:latest
    env_file:
      - /path/to/your/env/.env
```

Then access them in your programming language how you normally would. 